34 COMPUTER SCIENCE AND ENGINEERING
MTH211 MATHEMATICS 3
Numerical Methods: Solution of algebraic and transcendental equations, Solution of linear Simultaneous
Equations, Finite Differences, Interpolation and Extrapolation, Inverse Interpolation, Numerical
Differentiation and Integration, Numerical solution of Ordinary & Partial Differential Equations.
Statistics: Curve fitting, Correlation and Regression Analysis Probability Distribution, Sampling and
Testing of Hypothesis.
Reference
        1.     Numerical Analysis                                         Hildebrand
        2.     Numerical Analysis                                         Scarborough,
        3.     Numerical Methods                                          E .Balaguruswamy,
        4.     Numerical Methods for scientific and Engineering           M.K.Jain,
                                               or
CSE211 DATA STRUCTURE
 Introduction to Data Structures, Algorithm Evaluation, Arrays, Multi-dimensional, Sparse Matrices,
Structure, Pointers.Stacks: applications of Stacks, Prefix, Postfix and Infix notations and conversion,
Recursion, Tail Recursion, Towers of Hanoi.Queues: Types of Queue and its application.Linked lists:
Types of Linked list, implementation of Stack and Queue using Linked list, Josephus Problem,
Polynomial representation and Arithmetic.Trees: binary tree, n-ary Tree, Tree Traversal, Huffman
Coding, Binary Search Tree, AVL Tree.Graphs: Representation, Traversing, Shortest path, Minimum
SpaningTree.earching: Sequential Search, Binary Search, Hashing, Other search techniques.Sorting:
External and Internal Sort, Selection Sort, Bubble Sort, Insertion Sort, Quick Sort, Merge Sort and Heap
Sort, Radix Sort, Bucket Sort.
References:
     1.Data Structure Using C                                              Tanenbaum
CSE212 DISCRETE STRUCTURES
 Set Theory, Principle of inclusion and exclusion, Logic, Mathematical Induction, Discrete Probability,
Graph Theory, Relations, Partially ordered sets and lattices, Boolean algebra and Boolean Function,
Discrete Numeric functions, Recurrence Relations.
References
  2. Elements of Discrete Mathematics                                                             Liu C. L.
  3. Discrete Mathematics for Computer Scientists and Mathematicians
                                                                     Mott J. L. , Kandel A. and Baker T. P
  4. Graph Theory                                                                                Harary F.
  5. Introduction to Algorithms.                    Thomas H. C., Leiserson C. E.; Rivest R. L.; Stein C
  6. Discrete Mathematics with Applications                                              Thomas Koshy
CSE213 DIGITAL ELECTRONICS
 Number system, radix conversion, Binary codes, Boolean algebra, Logic gates, simplification of Boolean
expressions, minimization techniques.Combinational circuit: Full and half adder, Full and half subtractor,
Parallel adder and substractor, BCD adder, Excess 3 adder, Megnitude comparator, Look-ahed carry
generator, Multiplexer and Demultiplexer, Encoder and Decoder.Flip-Flop: RS, clocked RS, T, D, JK,
race-around problem, master slave JK, Sequential circuits: State diagrams, Designing of sequential
circuit, Minimization of sequential circuit, Synchronous and Asynchronous system, Synchronous Counter

                                                                                                       192
designing, Asynchronous counter, Registers, Shift registers, Serial and parallel registers, Johnson and
rings counter.
References
       1.Digital Electronics                                          Morris Mano
CSE214 DIGITAL COMMUNICATION
 Characterization of communication signals, Sampling , signal space representation, equalisation, matched
filtering, binary PSK, QPSK, FSK, QAM & M-Ary modulation techniques and their representation.
Coherent & noncoherent detection, carrier & symbol synchronization, bits vs symbol error probability,
bandwidth efficiency, Spread spectrum modulation: Pseudo noise sequences, DS & FH spread spectrum,
Noise in Communication Systems
References
     1. Digital Communications                                      Simon Haykin,
     2. Principles of Communication Systems                      Herbert Taub & Donald L Schilling
CSE215 COMPUTER GRAPHICS
Introduction to raster & random graphics fundamentals, Display devices & comparison Point plotting,
line drawing & circle drawing & their algorithm like DDA & Bressenhams, Video Basics- Graphics
input/ output devices techniques, Mouse, tablets, stylus, light pen, valuators, digitizers, and plotter
Devices independent graphics systems, positioning constraints, rubber band technique, dragging, inking
& painting, 2-D Transformation, Clipping, Windowing , View port,3-D transformation, clipping ,
viewing transformations, projection, curve generation methods. Graphics packages, segmented files,
geometric models, Picture Structure. Raster graphics, Character Displaying, Natural images Solid Area
Scan Conversion, Raster display hardware, Filling areas, aliasing & anti-aliasing Hidden surface
elimination, Shading.
References
      1. Principles of Interactive Computer Graphics                   William M. Newman
      2. Computer Graphics                                            D. Hern and M.P. Baker .
      3. Computer Graphics Multimedia and Animatiom                    Malay k Pakhira. PHI
CSE216 PRINCIPLES OF PROGRAMMING LANGUAGE
 Priliminary concepts of programming language, Issues in Language Translation: Syntax, Semantics,
Stages, analysis and synthesis, Data types, Expressions and Statements, Subprograms and Blocks,
Abstract Data types, Exception handling, Logic Programming Language, Functional Programming
Languages, Object-oriented programming
References
     1. Concepts of Programming Languages                             Robert .W. Sebesta
     2. Programming Languages                                        Louden,
   3. Programming languages                                         Ghezzi
   4. Programming Languages Design and Implementation              Pratt and Zelkowitz,
CSE217 DS LABORATORY
CSE 218 PPL LABORATORY
CSE219 CG LABORATORY
CSE221 PROBABILITY AND QUEUEING THEORY
 Probability: Sample space and events Probability The axioms of probability Some Elementary
theorems - Conditional probability                                            Discrete and continuous
Distribution Distribution function. Distribution.Binomial and poison distributions Normal distribution
                                                                                                     193
related properties. Classification, Stationary process, Markov process, Binominal process, Poisson
process, Birth and death process, Renewal process , Markov chain, Transition probabilities, Limiting
distributions, Concepts of reliability, Hazard function, Series Classification, Stationary process, Markov
process, Binominal process, Poisson process, Birth and death process, Renewal process Markov chain,
Transition probabilities, Limiting distributions, Concepts of reliability, Hazard function, Series
References
  1. Probability and Statistics with reliability, Queuing and Computer Science            Trivedi K.S
  2 Reliability Engineering                                                          Balagurusamy .E
  3 Fundamentals of Queuing Theory                                           Gross D, and Harris C.M,
  4 Probability Statistics and Queuing Theory                                              Allen, A.O.
CSE222 COMPUTER ARCHITECTURE
Central processor organizations: basic building blocks, bus organized computer memory, address
structure, register transfer languages, instruction formats and addressing modes. Control unit
organization: hardwired control & micro-programmed control organization, control memory, address
sequencing micro-instruction formats, micro-program sequencer, micro-programming. Arithmetic
processor design: addition and subtraction algorithm, multiplication algorithm, division algorithm,
processor configuration, and floating point arithmetic. Input-Output organization: Asynchronous Data
Transfer, Asynchronous Communication Interface, Modes of Transfer: Interrupt-Initiated, Direct Memory
Access (DMA). Memory Organization: Main Memory, Auxiliary Memory, Associative Memory:
Hardware Organization, Cache Memory: Mapping Schemes, Virtual Memory: Address Space and
Memory Space, Address Mapping. Structure of multiprocessors: parallel processing, pipeline processing.
References
       1. Computer Organization and architectur                                      William Stallings
       2. Computer Architecture                                                     Morris Mano,
       3. Computer Organisation& Architecture                                         T.K. Ghosh,
CSE223 THEORY OF COMPUTATION
Finite State Systems, Basic Definitions Non-Deterministic finite automata (NDFA), Deterministic finite
automata (DFA), Equivalence of DFA and NDFA Finite automata with E-moves, Regular Expressions,
Equivalence of finite automata and Regular Expressions, Regular expression conversion and vice versa,
Myhill-Nerode Theorem and minimization of finite Automata. Concept of basic Machine, Properties and
limitations of FSM. Moore and mealy Machines, Equivalence of Moore and Mealy machines, Properties
of Regular Sets: The Pumping Lemma for Regular Sets, Closure properties of regular sets. Context free
grammar and Ambiguity, Reduced forms, Removal of useless Symbols and unit production, Chomsky
Normal Form (CNF), Griebach Normal Form (GNF). Introduction to Pushdown Machines, Application of
Pushdown Machines, context free grammar to PDA and vice versa, Closure properties of CFL.
Deterministic and Non-Deterministic Turing Machines, Design of T.M, Halting problem of T.M., PCP
Problem. Chomsky hierarchies of grammars, Context sensitive grammar, Unrestricted grammars, Context
sensitive languages, Relation between languages of classes. Computability: Basic concepts, Primitive
Recursive Functions.
References
    1. Introduction to automata theory, language & computations Hopcroaft&O.D.Ullman, R Mothwani,
    2.Theory of Computer Sc.(Automata, Languages and computation):
                                                               K.L.P.Mishra&N.Chandrasekaran,
    3.Introduction to formal Languages & Automata             Peter Linz,
    4.Fundamentals of the Theory of Computation- Principles and Practice
                                                                                                      194
                                                              RamondGreenlaw and H. James Hoover
 CSE224 DATABASE MANAGEMENT SYSTEMS
Fundamentals of DBMS, different data models.Relational database systems, SQL. ER modelling,
Enhanced ER Model, ER to Relational Mapping. Relational Database Design, integrity constraints,
functional dependency constraints, assertions, triggers, Normalization in relational approach. Data storage
and indexing in database systems, overview of query processing and cost estimation. Overview of
advanced databases: object oriented databases, object relational model, distributed databases, parallel
databases, temporal databases, spatial databases, web& multimedia databases.
References
     1. Fundamentals of Database Systems                                              Elmasri&Navathe
     2.. Database System Concepts                                       Silberschatz ,Korth&Sudershan .
CSE225 ANALYSIS AND DESIGN OF ALGORITHMS
Fundamentals of algorithm, asymptotic complexity, recursive algorithms, recurrence relation, disjoint set
structure. Algorithm Design Techniques their control abstractions and related problems: Divide and
conquer, Greedy strategy dynamic programming, Backtracking, Branch and bound, least cost search.
Introduction to lower-bound theory, Introduction to NP-Complete and NP Hard problems.
References
    1. Computer algorithms                                                      Horowitz and Sahani.
    2.Introduction to algorithms                                                  Cormen and Rivest
CSE226 SOFTWARE ENGINEERING
 Introduction to software engineering, software process & process models, capability maturity model
(CMM). Software metrics and measurements, software project planning, scheduling and tracking, cost
estimation methods and quality assurance.Requirements analysis: Principles, complexity, methods,
structured analysis, SRSDocumentation.Design principles: abstraction, refinement, modularity, control
hierarchy,Structured partitioning, design types and methods.Software coding: coding style, coding
efficiency.Software testing: Software testing techniques, choice and classification of test data, verification
& validation methods. Software maintenance, configuration management, system documentation,
software reusability.
References
     1. An Integrated Approach to Software Engineering                                      PankajJalote,
     2. Software Engineering: A Practitioner's Approach                                      R S. Pressman,
CSE227 DBMS LABORATORY
CSE228 ADA          LABORATORY
CSE229 SE           LABORATORY
Fifth Semester
CSE311 COMPILER DESIGN
 Compilers and translators, need of translators, structure of compiler :its different phases, Compiler
construction tools. Role of lexical analyzer, design of lexical analyzer, regular expressions , Specification
and recognition of tokens, input buffering, A language specifying lexical analyzer. Implementation of
lexical analyzer.
Role of parsers, context free grammars, definition of parsing. Shift- reduce parsing, operator precedence
parsing, top down par sing, predictive parsing. Syntax directed definition, construction of syntax trees,
syntax directed translation scheme, implementation of syntax directed translation, three address code,
quadruples and triples. Symbol tables, its contents and data structure for symbol tables; trees, arrays,

                                                                                                          195
linked lists, hash tables. Errors, lexical phase error, syntactic phase error, semantic error. Code generation,
forms of objects code, machine dependent code, optimization, register allocation for temporary and user
defined variables.
References
    1. Compilers Principle, Techniques & Tools                   Alfread V. AHO, Ravi Sethi& J.D. Ullman
    2.Theory and practice of compiler writing                                           Tremblay & Sorenson
    3. System software                                                                               Dhamdae
CSE312 OPERATING SYSTEMS
Operating system functions and characteristics, design issues, Process abstraction, process management,
system calls, threads, process hierarchy, cpu scheduling, comparative study of scheduling algorithms
Process synchronization and inter-process communication, message passing mechanisms, Process
synchronization constructs Deadlock Characterization, prevention and avoidance, deadlock detection and
recovery. Memory management techniques, overlays, dynamic linking, virtual memory concept. Disk
structure, Disk scheduling, File System, file access and allocation methods, directory system, file
protection mechanisms, implementation issues, Device Management: Hardware organization, device
scheduling policies, device drivers. Case Studies: Windows, Unix, Linux.
References
    1. Operating system                                                          Silberschatz and Galvin
    2. Operating system                                                       Deital
    3. Operating system                                                       Andrew S. Tanenbaum
CSE313 MICROPROCESSORS
 The processor: 8086/8088-Architectures, 8086/8088 instruction set and Addressing modes, Assembly
language programming with 8086/8088, Special Architecture feature: interrupts and interrupt
programming, Basic peripherals and their interfacing with 8086/8088, Special purpose programmable
peripheral devices and their interfacing, DMA Floppy Disk and CRT controllers, An overview of RISC
& CISC processors, An introduction to microcontroller 8051.
References
    1. Advanced Microprocessor and peripherals                           A K Ray, K M Bhurchandi
    2. Microprocessor                                                    D.V Hall
    3. 8051 Microcontroller                                              K.J Ayala
CSE315 CD LABORATORY
CSE316 µP        LABORATORY
CSE 317 OS LABORATORY
Sixth semester
CSE321 COMPUTER NETWORK
Introduction to TCP/IP and OSI reference model, polling techniques, multiplexing, and concentration ,
transmission media used in physical layer. MAC protocols ALOHA, CSMA/CA, CSMA/CD Ethernet,
token bus, token ring, (IEEE 802.3, IEEE 802.4, IEEE 802.5) DLL protocols, error correction
anddetection codes, flow control protocols performance evaluation with error or without error, protocol
pecification and verification, framing, HDLC. Switching techniques, Routing and congestion in network
layer, routing and congestion control algorithms. Connection management in transport layer, protocols of
transport layer, TCP , UDP etc. Data security and cryptography techniques, concepts of public key
andprivate key cryptography, world wide web(www), electronic mail(E-mail), Queuing theory, Study of
high speed fiber optic networks, FDDI, SONET, ATM, X.25 network, ARPANET, USENET etc.

                                                                                                           196
References
      1.Computer Network                                      Tannenbaum.
      2. Computer Network                                     W.Stalling.
      3. Data network                                        Dimitris and Galliger.
CSE322 DATA WAREHOUSING AND MINING
Introduction to data mining - kinds of data, relational databases, traditional databases, advanced database
systems. Data Mining functionalities and patterns generated.Data Preprocessing: - Data Cleaning, Data
Integration and Transformation, Data Reduction Data Discretization, Concept Hierarchy GenerationData
Warehouse and OLAP Technology - A Multidimensional Data M
Constellations Schemas for Multidimensional Databases, OLAP operations, Data Warehouse
ArchitectureAssociations and Correlations- The Apriori Algorithm, Finding Frequent Item sets Using
Candidate Generation Mining, Frequent Item sets without Candidate Generation Mining, Frequent Item
                                                   -
                      -                                                            - Linear Regression and
Non linear Regression Clustering- Portioning and hierarchical MethodsMining Social Network, spatial
databases, multidimensional databases, text databases and World Wide Web.
References
      1.Data Mining: Concepts and Techniques                   Jiawei Han, MichelineKamber and Jian Pei,
      2.Data Mining Introduction and Advance Topic                     Margaret H. Dunham and S. Sridhar
CSE323 ARTIFICIAL INTELLIGENCE
Meaning and definition of artificial intelligence, Production systems: types, characteristics, study and
comparison search techniques:BSF, DSF,hill climbing, best first search, A* algorithm, AO* algorithm
etc,types of control strategies. Knowledge representation: Problems faced, propositional and predicate
logic, resolution and refutation, deduction, theorem proving. Reasoning: introduction, reasoning methods,
                                                     Slot and filler structures: semantic networks, frames,
conceptual dependency,scripts etc. Game playing and its techniques, planning techniques, study of blocks
world problem in robotics, understanding, natural language processing and common sense. Learning and
its techniques, neural networks and its applications, expert systems.
References:
     1.Artificial Intelligence                                             Elaine Rich and Kevin Knight .
     2.Introduction to Artificial Intelligence                    Eugene Charniak and Drew McDermott
CSE325 NETWORK LABORATORY
CSE326 UNIX LABORATORY
CSE 327 MINOR PROJECT
Department electives
CSE331 ADVANCE COMPUTER ARCHITECTURE
Pipeline processor principles and design, Instruction set architecture; Memory addressing; Instruction
composition; Instruction-level parallelism; Hazards: dynamic scheduling, branch prediction; Memory
hierarchy; Processor case studies; Multiprocessor introduction: Shared-memory architectures and their
synchronisation and consistency issues, Advanced multi-core topics; Transactional Memory;
Interconnection networks.
References
      1.Computer Architecture and parallel processing                                    Kai Hwang, Briggs
      2.Advanced Computer Architecture: Parallelism, Scalability, Programmability              Kai Hwang,

                                                                                                       197
      3. Computer Architecture: A Quantitative Approach,               . J. L. Hennessy and D. A. Patterson
       4. Parallel Computer Architecture: A Hardware/Software Approach
                                                               David Culler, J.P. Singh and Anoop Gupta
CSE332 SOFTWARE REUSABILITY
 Software Engineering Process, Software Reuse Factors, Reuse driven Software Engineering Business,
Overview of software reuse metrics.Architectural Style: Object oriented software engineering Application
and component systems, Use Case Components, Object components, Layered architecture.Approaches for
software reuse - Patterns, Frameworks and Components.Pattern and Framework Approaches: Design
patterns, Analysis patterns, Organizational patterns, Anti-patterns. Creational Patterns, Structural Patterns,
Behavioural Patterns, Architectural Patterns.Component System Engineering & Application System
Engineering: Requirement analysis, Robustness analysis, Designing, Implementing, Testing and
Packaging of the Component system.Case Studies.
References
      1 Reusability and Software Construction: C and C                                    Jerry D. Smith.
      2.Design Patterns: Elements of Reusable Object-Oriented Software
                                          Richard Helm, Erich Gamma, John Vlissides and Ralph Johnson.
      3.Reuse-Based Software Engineering: Techniques, Organizations, and Controls
                                                                      HafedhMili and Sherif M. Yacoub.
      4 Software Reusability                           Wilhelm Schafer , Diaz Prieto and Wilhelm Shafer .
CSE333 VLSI DESIGN
 Digital Systems And VLSI,Basic Electrical Properties Of Cmos, Data Structure in VLSI design,
Fabrication And Devices, Logic Gates, Combinational Logic Networks, Sequential Machines, Subsystem/
Peripheral Design, Validation And Testability, Floor planning And Architecture Design
References
      1. Modern VLSI Design: IP-Based Design                                                  Wayne Wolf
      2.Basics VLSI Design                                                      Pucknell and Eshraghian
CSE334 PARALLEL AND DISTRIBUTED ALGORITHMS
Introduction to parallel algorithm, data parallel and control parallel approach, models of parallel
computation, dense matrix algorith , sorting serching, selection and graph algorithms. Introduction to
distributed algorithms, synchronous algorithms network model, leader election algorithm, minimum
spanning tree, shortest path , distributed consensus k agreement problem, two phase commit, three phase
commit , mutual exclusion algorithms, applications of distributed algorithm.
References
     1.Parallel algorithms                                                      Michael . J . Quinn
     2.Distributed algorithms                                                   Nancy Lynch
CSE335 DISTRIBUTED DATABASE
Introduction to Distributed Database Systems, Distributed DBMS Architecture, Distributed Database
Design, Semantic Data Control, Overview of Query Processing, Introduction to Transaction Management,
Distributed Concurrency Control, Parallel Database Systems, Distributed Object Database Management
systems, Database Interoperability
References
     1.Principles of Distributed Database Systems                      M.Tamer Ozsu Patrick Valduriez
     2.Distributed Databases Principles and Systems                  Stefano Ceri and GuiseppePelagatti,


                                                                                                          198
CSE336 EMBEDDED SYSTEMS
Introduction, Hardware & electronics fundamentals, Peripherals Program Design and Analysis, Processes
and Operating system, Real time Operating system Memory, Interfacing Examples of Embedded
systems: Digital Camera Examples, Smart card application, Embedded database applications, etcState
Machine and Concurrent Process Models, Control Systems Verilog programming, Programming of
mobile and Hand-held devices IC Technology Full-Custom (VLSI) IC Technology, Semi-Custom
(ASIC) IC Technology, Programmable Logic Device (PLD) IC Technology, FPGA Hardware Software
Partitioning, Hardware/Software Co-Simulation, Intellectual Property Cores, Low Power design
References
      1. Embedded system Design                                            Frank Vahid, Tony Givargis
      2.Computer as Components                                            Wayne Wolf
      3.8051 Microcontroller & Embedded Systems                            Rajiv Kapadia
      4.The 8051 Microcontroller & Embedded Systems,                       Mazidi&Mazida
CSE337 CRYPTOGRAPHY
Introduction to cryptography.SecurityAttacks,mechanism and Services.Cryptosystems, Conventional
encryption model and techniques, classical encryption techniques- substitution ciphers and transposition
ciphers, cryptanalysis, stream and block ciphers. Block ciphers principals, fiestal structure, SPN, DES,
triple DES, AES,IDEA encryption and decryption, key distribution.finite field: Introduction to graph, ring

                                                                                   -key cryptographic
systems, Principals of public key crypto systems, RSA algorithm, Diffle-Hellman key exchange
algorithm, Message Authentication and Hash Function: security of hash functions and MACS, MD5
message digest algorithm, secure hash algorithm (SHA). Digital Signatures.
References
     1.Cryptography and Network Security: Principles and Practice                 William Stallings,
     2.Cryptography Theory and Practice                                                Douglas R.
Stinson.
CSE338 HETEROGENEOUS COMPUTING
Heterogeneous computing: Overview, Types of system, Areas of heterogeneity, Shortcomings of
Homogeneous System.
Heterogeneous computing by multiple CPUs: Grid, Cluster and Other multi-core architectures.
Heterogeneous computing using CPU-GPU: Overview of GPUs, Introduction of GPGPU, Architecture,
Features, Programming model, Thread Organization, Memory management, GPU-CPU load balancing,
Optimization, Floating Point Performance, Multiple GPUs.
Case study: GPGPU based Heterogeneous computing by OpenCL and CUDA.
References
     1.State-of-the-art in heterogeneous computing                         Andre R. Brodtkorb
     2.Heterogeneous Processing: a Strategy for Augmenting Moore's Law,      Amar Shan,
     3.Heterogeneous Computing with OpenCL                                 Benedict Gaster
CSE339 DIGITAL IMAGE PROCESSING
Introduction to Image Processing Systems, Digital Image Fundamentals:- Image model, Relationship
between Pixels, Imaging geometry, Camera model. Image Sensing and Acquisition.Sampling and
quantization.Image        Enhancement      and     in   spatial      Domain:     Point      processing,
NeighbourhoodProcessing,High pass filtering , High boost filtering, zooming. ImageEnhancement based
on Histogram medelling.Image Enhacement in frequency domain: 1D& 2D Fourier transform, Low pass
                                                                                                   199
frequency domain filter, High pass frequency domain filters, Homomorphics filtering.Image
Segmentation:- Detection of discontinuation by point detection, line detection, edge detection. Edge
linking and boundary detection:- Local analysis, global by graph, theoretic techniques. Thresh-
holding.orphology,Representation and description.Discrete image transform.ImageCompression.Wavelet
transformation.
References
      1.Digital Image Processing                                              Gonzalez & Wood
      2.Digital Image Processing                                              A.K.Jain
      3.Image Processing                                                     Dhananjayk.
CSE341 E-COMMERCE AND E-GOVERNANCE
Introduction: Electronic Commerce, Technology and Prospects, forces behind E-Commerce, Advantages
and Disadvantages, Architectural framework, E-Commerce Strategy, E-Commerce emerging Issues and
implementation issues, E- Commerce Law, Govt. policies and Agenda. Electronic Payment Systems:
Credit cards, debit cards, smart cards, e-credit accounts, e-money, Marketing on the web, marketing
strategies, advertising on the web, customer service and support, introduction to m-commerce. E-payment
security.E-Government, theoretical background of e-governance, issues in e-governance applications,
evolution of e-governance, its scope and content, benefits and reasons for the introduction of e-
governance, e-governance models- broadcasting, critical flow, comparative analysis, mobilization and
lobbying ,interactive services / G2C2G.E-readiness, e-government readiness, E- Framework, step &
issues, application of data warehousing and data mining in e-government, Case studies: NICNET-role of
nation wide networking in e governance, e-seva.E-Government systems security: Challenges and
approach to e-government security, security concern in e-commerce, security for server computers,
communication channel security, security for client computers.
Open elctives
CSE351 MULTIMEDIA
Introduction to multimedia, Multimedia system design, data and file format standards, data compression
and decompression techniques, lossy and lossless compression. Multimedia input and output
technologies, storage and retrieval technologies.           Multimedia Communications, multimedia
communication protocols (UDP , RTP , RTCP , XTP , TELNET , IP Multicast etc), network performance
parameters, streaming. Multimedia Applications and Design issues, hypermedia message, integrated
multimedia message standards. Multimedia authoring system and tools user interface design.
References
     1.Multimedia system Design                                 Prabhat K Andleigh and KiranThakrar
     2.Multimedia Communications                                Fred Halsall
CSE352 OBJECT ORIENTED PROGRAMMING
Object Orientation, OMT Methodology, Object and Class, Link and Association, Generalization,
Aggregation Multiple Inheritance, Packages, Object Meta modeling, Metadata and Metamodels,
Functional Modeling Pseudocode, Pseudocode with the Object Navigation Notation, ONN Constructs,
combining ONN Constructs, Analysis:-Object Model, Data Dictionary, Dynamic Model, Functional
Model System Design- Devising an Architecture, Database Management Paradigm, Object Identity,
Policies for Detailed Design Dealing with temporal data. Detailed Design:- Object Model
Transformations, Elaborating the Object Model, Elaborating the Functional Model, Evaluating the
Quality of a Design Model.
References
      1.Object-Oriented Modeling and Design                              Michael Blaha / William
Premerlani,
                                                                                                   200
 CSE353 SIMULATION AND MODELING
Systems, modeling, general systems theory, concept of simulation, simulation as a decision making tool,
types of simulation. Pseudo random numbers, methods of generating random variables, discrete and
continuous distributions, testing of random numbers, concepts of Queuing theory. Design of simulation
experiments: Problem formulation, data collection and reduction, time flow mechanism, key variables,
logic flow chart, starting condition, run size, experimental design consideration, output analysis and
interpretation validation. Simulation languages: Comparison and selection of simulation languages,
study of these simulation language. Case studies: Development of simulation models using simulation
language studied for systems like queuing systems, Production systems, Inventory systems, maintenance
and replacement systems and Investment analysis.
References
       1.System Simulation                                                                Geoffrey Gordon
       2.System Simulation with Digital Computer                                              NarsinghDeo
 CSE354 UNIX INTERNALS AND SHELL PROGRAMMING
Architecture of the UNIX OS, the buffer cache, internal representation of files(inode, accessing blocks,
releasing blocks, structure of regular files, conversion of a path name to an inode, inode assignment to a
new file, allocation of disk block). System calls for the file systems, OPEN, READ, WRITE, and CLOSE,
PIPES, the pipe system call , opening a named pipes, reading and writing pipes, closing pipes, DUP,
mounting and amounting file system, LINK ,UNLINK, SYSTEM call for TIME and CLOCK. The
structure of processes, process states and transitions, layout of system memory, the context of a process,
saving the context of the process, manipulation of the process address space. Process control, process
creation, signals, process termination, awaiting process termination, the user id of a process, changing the
size of the process, the system BOOT and INIT process. Shell programming, study of different type of
shell like C shell, Bourne shell etc. shell script, shell command, looping and making choices, for Loop,
while and until, passing arguments to scripts, programming in different shells. Inter process
communication, process tracing, network communication, sockets multiprocessor system, problem of
multiprocessor systems, solution with master a slave processor, solution with semaphores, study of
distributed UNIX system.
References
       1.The Design Of UNIX Operating System                                          Maurice J Bach.
Seventh semester
CSE411 SOFT COMPUTING
Introduction to neural networks, Working of an artificial neuron, Perceptron, Back propagation algorithm,
Adalines and Madalines.Supervised and unsupervised learning, Counter-propagation networks, Adaptive
                                                                          ssociative memory, Bidirectional
Associative Memory. Introduction to fuzzy logic and fuzzy sets, fuzzy relations, fuzzy graphs, fuzzy
arithmetic and fuzzy if-then rules, Process control using fuzzy logic, Decision-making fuzzy systems,
Applications of fuzzy logic, Hybrid systems like neuro-fuzzy systems. Evolutionary Computation:
Population-based Search: genetic algorithms and evolutionary computation, Genetic Programming.
Search techniques like Simulated Annealing, Tabu search etc.
References
     1.Soft Computing and Intelligent Systems Design                          F.O.Karray and C.DeSilva,
     2.Neural Networks, Fuzzy Logic and Genetic Algorithms                    Rajsekaran and Pai
CSE412 SOFT COMPUTING LABORATORY



                                                                                                        201
CSE413 MAJOR PROJECT AND SEMINAR
The student has to select a project work based on topic of interest. Periodically the implementation will
be evaluated by the project guide. The work starts in seventh semester and continues through eighth
semester. The end of each semester student will be evaluated by department committee formed by HOD
CSE414 EDUCATIONA TOUR / INDUSTRIAL TRAINING
Student has to select the industry for his/her training program. After the training , student has to submit a
report about the training. Based on the report and presentation, student will be evaluated by department
committee formed by HOD
Eighth Semester
CSE421 NETWORK SECURITY
Introduction to Network security: Network security needs. Threats to network security, kind of computer
security. security policies, security mechanisms, Attacks, security tools and Basic Cryptography,
Transposition/Substitution, Block Cipher Principles, Introduction to Symmetric crypto primitives,
Asymmetric crypto primitives, Secret Key Cryptography , Data Encryption Standard (DES), Message
Digests, MD5, Message Authentication and Hash Functions, Hash And Mac Algorithms, RIPEMD ,
HMAC, Principles of Public Key Cryptosystems, Diffie Hellman Key Exchange , Elliptic Curve
Cryptography, Cryptanalysis, SHA-1,           RSA, Selection of public and private keys.Key distribution
centers and certificate authorities, digital signature standards (DSS), proof of digital signature algorithm.
Kerberos, Real-time Communication Security, IPsec,Electronic Mail Security . Firewalls and Web
Security, Intruders and Viruses, trusted system, password management. Cyber crime
References
     1. Cryptography and Network Security                                    William Stallings
     2.Introduction to network security                                      Krawetz, Cengage
CSE422 MAJOR PROJECT AND SEMINAR
The student has to select a project work based on topic of interest. Periodically the implementation will
be evaluated by the project guide. The work starts in seventh semester and continues through eighth
semester. The end of each semester student will be evaluated by department committee formed by HOD
CSE423 GENERAL PROFICIENCY
Department electives
CSE431 SOFTWARE TESTING
Software Testing Principles, Quality, Testing flow process. Defect Classification: Origin of Defects,
Classes, Repository and Design, Developer/Tester Support for Developing a Defect Repository.Test Case
Design Strategies: Black Box Approach , Random Testing, Equivalence Class Partitioning, Boundary
Value Analysis, COTS, White Box approach, Test Adequacy Criteria, Coverage and Control Flow
Graphs, Covering Code Logic, Additional White Box Test Design Approaches, Evaluating Test
Adequacy Criteria.Unit testing, Integration testing, System testing, Regression testing and Acceptance
testing, Test Plan Writing. Testing Tools.Criteria for Test Completion.
References:
       1. Software Testing in the Real World Improving the Process                          Edward Kit
      2.Effective Software Testing                                                     Elfriede Dustin
CSE432 CLOUD COMPUTING
Cloud Computing: Introduction, Working of cloud computing, benefits; Understanding Cloud
Computing: Developing cloud computing services, Discovering cloud services; Cloud Computing for
Everyone: Centralizing email communications, Cloud computing for community; Cloud Computing for
the Corporation: Managing Schedules, Managing Projects; Using Cloud Services: Collaborating on
                                                                                                    202
Calendars, Schedules, and Task Management, Collaborating on Project Management Outside the Cloud:
Other Ways to Collaborate Online: Collaborating via Web-Based Communication Tools, Collaborating
via Social Networks and Groupware.
References
          1. Cloud Computing                                                                 Michael Miller,
          2.Implementing and Developing Cloud Computing Applications                     David E.,Y. Sarna,
CSE433 DISTRIBUTED COMPUTING
Distributed Computing: Introduction, Types, Various system models. Communication and Processes:
RPC, RMI and others, Client and Server threads. Clock Synchronization: Types of clock and their
synchronization, Introduction to distributed mutual exclusion, Election of a process, Consensus and
related problems; Consistency: Various types of consistency, Consistency protocols, Fault tolerance:
Introduction to fault tolerance, Process resilience; Protection and security in distributed systems: Various
types of security techniques, Cryptography; Examples of distributed systems: Distributed file systems,
Distributed shared memory and others.
References
      1.Distributed Systems Principles and paradigms                   Andrew S. Tanenbaum and Maarten
      2. Distributed systems, concepts and design, George Colouris, Jean Dollimore and Tim Kindberg.
CSE434 PATTERN RECOGNITION
Introduction to Pattern Recognition, Regular Pattern, Irregular Pattern, Approaches to Pattern
Recognition, Parametric, Non-Parametric Approaches. Parzen window method for density estimation,
Feature selection, Search methods, Pattern Recognition Applications., Discriminant functions, Decision
surfaces, Classification algorithms: Naive Bayes, Random Tree, Random Forest, , Multiple Polynomial
Regression, Classification using SVM. Classifier Ensembles, , Linear Regression, Introduction to hidden
Markov models (HMMs), Discrete HMMs and Evaluation problem, Forward method for evaluation
problem, Backward method for evaluation problem, Parameter estimation for HMMs, Continuous density
HMMs (CDHMMs),Types of Clustering, K-Mean Clustering, Iso-data Clustering, Clustering Metrics,
Clustering applications, Fuzzy K-Mean, Clustering tendency, Semi Supervised learning. Fuzzy variants of
classification and clustering algorithms, Neural networks fundamentals, Genetic Algorithms, Neural and
Genetic based approaches for Pattern recognition, Self organizing maps, Advantages/Disadvantages of
Neural based approaches for Pattern Recognition.
References
      1. Pattern recognition and image processing                         Earl Gose
      2. Pattern classification                                         Duda ,Hart,stork.
CSE435 COMPUTER VISION
Introduction to computer vision, computer imaging system, Image formation and sensing CVIP tools,
Image representation. Elements of Visual Perception, Light and the Electromagnetic Spectrum, Image
Sensing and Acquisition, Image Sampling and Quantization. Image Enhancement in the Spatial Domain,
Image Enhancement in the Frequency Domain, Homomorphic Filtering. Image Restoration, Color Image
Processing, Segmentation, Thresholding, The Use of Motion in Segmentation, Image Compression,
Error-Free Compression, Lossy Compression, Image Compression Standards, Wavelets and
Multiresolution Processing, Multiresolution Expansions, Wavelet Transforms.
References
      1. Computer Vision                                                Young, Tzay Y.
      2. Computer visioin                                               Dana H. Ballard


                                                                                                        203
CSE436 RANDOMIZED ALGORITHMS
Introduction to randomized algorithms. Game Theoretic Techniques. Probabilistic Method, Markov
Chains and Random Walks. Randomized Data Structures: Treaps, skip lists, Hash tables. Geometric
algorithms and linear programming, Graph algorithms, Approximate Counting, Online Algorithms.
References
     1.Randomized Algorithm                                                 Motwani and Raghavan
CSE437 NATURAL LANGUAGE PROCESSING
Regular Expressions and Automata, N-grams, Part-of-Speech Tagging, Hidden Markov and Maximum
Entropy Models, Formal Grammars of English, Syntactic Parsing, Statistical Parsing, Features and
Unification, Language and Complexity, The Representation of Meaning, Computational Semantics,
Computational Lexical Semantics, Information Extraction, Question Answering and Summarization,
Machine Translation
References
     1. Speech and Language Processing: An Introduction to Natural Language Processing,
        Computational Linguistics, and Speech Recognition                     D. Jurafsky and J. Martin
     2. Foundations of Statistical Natural Language Processing                 C. Manning and H. Schutze
CSE438 MOBILE COMPUTING
Introduction to Mobile Communications and Computing, novel applications, GSM: Mobile services,
System architecture, and new data services. (Wireless) Medium Access Control :Motivation for a
specialized MAC, DMA, FDMA, TDMA, CDMA. Mobile Network Layer :Mobile IP, IP packet
delivery, Dynamic Host Configuration Protocol (DHCP). Mobile Transport Layer : Traditional TCP,
Indirect TCP, Snooping TCP, Mobile TCP, Fast retransmit/fast recovery, Transmission /time-out
freezing, Selective retransmission, Transaction oriented TCP. Database Issues: client server computing
with adaptation, transactional models, and quality of service issues. Mobile Ad hoc Networks
(MANETs): Properties of a MANET, spectrum of MANET applications, routing and various routing
algorithms, security in MANETs. Protocols and Tools: Wireless Application Protocol-WAP. Bluetooth
and J2ME.
References
     1.MobileCommunications                                         JochenSchiller
     2.Handbook of Wireless Networks and Mobile Computing            Stojmenovic and Cacute
     3.Fundamentals of Mobile and Pervasive Computing
                     Adelstein, Frank, Gupta, Sandeep KS, Richard III, Golden , Schwiebert, Loren
CSE439 QUANTUM COMPUTING
Quantum Computing: Overview of traditional computing and Quantum computing, Church-Turing thesis,
Circuit model of computation, Quantum physics and Computation, Dual vectors, Operators; Qubits and
Quantum modle of computation: State of a quantum system, Time evolution of a closed system,
Composite systems, States and general quantum operations, Quantum gates, Universal sets of quantum
gates; Quantum Algorithms: Superdense coding, quantum teleportation, probabilistic versus quantum
algorithms, phase kick-bac, the Deutsch algorithm, Quantum phase estimation and Quantum Fourier
Transform , Shor's algorithm for order finding ,Quantum search algorithm; Quantum computational
complexity and error: Computational complexity, Black-box model, Lower bounds for searching, General
black-box lower bounds, Classical error correction , Fault tolerance ,Quantum error correction.
References
     1.Quantum Computing                                          V. Sahni,
     2. An introduction to Quantum Computing                       P. Kaye, R. Laflamme, and M. Mosca,
                                                                                                    204
CSE441 SENSOR NETWORKS
Introduction of ad-hoc/sensor networks: key definitions, advantages, unique constraints and challenges,
applications, and wireless communications/radio characteristics. Media Access Control and routing
protocols for Ad-Hoc wireless networks: issues, classification and protocols. Networking Sensors:
features, deployment of sensor networks, sensor tasking and control. Sensor Network platforms and tools
:Berkley Motes ,Sensor network programming challenges ,Embedded Operating System.Transport layer,
QoS issues and security protocols for ad hoc and sensor networks. Simulators for wireless ad hoc and
sensor networks.Applications of Ad-Hoc/Sensor Network and Future Directions.
References
    1.Ad hoc Wireless Networks                                      C. Siva Ram Murthy & B. S. Manoj
    2.Wireless Sensor Networks: An Information Processing Approach Feng Zhao and Leonidas J.
Guibas,
CSE442 WEB SEARCH & MINING
 Introduction, Document Representation, Tokenization, term-document matrix,Query languages and
query,operation,Indexing and searching, clustering, ranking,Ontology, domain specific search,Parallel
and distributed information retrieval,Text and multimedia languages,Social networks.
References
    1. An introduction to Information Retrieval           Manning, C., Raghavan, P., and Schutze, H
    2. Mining the web: Mining the Web: Discovering knowledge from hypertext data. Chakrabarti, S
Open electives
CSE451 GRAPH THEORY
Definition of a graph and directed graph, simple graph. Degree of a vertex, regular graph, bipartite
graphs, subgraphs, complete graph, complement of a graph, operations of graphs, isomorphism and
homomorphism between two graphs, directed graphs and relations. Walks, paths and circuits,
connectedness of a graph, Disconnected graphs and their components, Konigsberg 7-bridge problem,
Around the world problem, Euler graphs, Hamiltonian paths and circuits, Existence theorem for Eulerian
and Hamiltonian graphs. Trees and their properties, distance and centre in a tree and in a graph, rooted
and binary trees, spanning trees and forest, fundamental circuits, cut sets, connectivity and separability,1-
isomorphism, 2-isomorphism, breadth first and depth first search. Incidence matrix and its sub matrices,
Reduced incidence matrix, circuit matrix, fundamental circuit matrix, cut set matrix, fundamental cut set

               graphs, detections of planarity, geometric dual, combinatorial dual. Chromatic number,
independent set of vertices, maximal independent set, chromatic partitioning, dominating set, minimal
dominating set, chromatic polynomial, coloring and four colour problem, coverings, machings in a graph.
Network flows, Ford-Fulkerson algorithm for maximum flow, Dijkstra algorithm for shortest path
                                          algorithms for minimum spanning tree.
References
  1. Graph Theory with Applications to engineering and computer science             Deo Narsingh.
  2. A first Look At Graph Theory                                       Clark John and Holton D.A.,
  3. Graphs and Applications: An Introductory Approach                      Aldous and Wilson,
  4. Graph Theory                                                          Reinhard Diestel,
CSE452 OPTIMIZATION TECHNIQUES
Engineering application of Optimization, Formulation of design problems as mathematical programming
problems, General Structure of Optimization Algorithms ,Constraints, The Feasible Region, Branches of
Mathematical Programming ,Gradient Information, The Taylor Series, Types of Extrema, Necessary and
                                                                                                         205
Sufficient Conditions for Local Minima and Maxima, Classification of Stationary Points , Convex and
Concave Functions, Optimization of Convex Functions, General Properties of Algorithms ,An Algorithm
as a Point-to-Point Mapping,An Algorithm as a Point-to-Set Mapping Closed Algorithms , Descent
Functions, Global Convergence, Rates of Convergence. Unconstrained Optimization: One dimensional
optimization techniques: Dichotomous Search, Fibonacci Search ,Golden-Section Search, Quadratic
Interpolation Method ,Cubic Interpolation, The Algorithm of Davies, Swann, and Campey, Inexact Line
Searches , Multidimensional Gradient Methods ,Steepest-Descent Method, Newton Method Gauss-
Newton Method, Conjugate-Direction Methods: Conjugate Directions, Basic Conjugate-Directions
Method, Conjugate-Gradient Method, Minimization of Non-quadratic Functions, Fletcher-Reeves
Method, Powell's Method, Partan Method. Quasi-Newton Methods: The Basic Quasi-Newton Approach,
Generation of Matrix Sk ,Rank-One Method, Davidon-Fletcher-Powell Method, Broyden-Fletcher-
Goldfarb-Shanno Method, Hoshino Method, The Broyden Family, The Huang Family, Practical Quasi-
Newton Algorithm,Applications of Unconstrained Optimization,Nonlinear Least Squares Problem and
Algorithms. Linear Programming: Graphical method, Simplex method, Duality in linear programming
(LP),Sensitivity analysis, Interior-Point Methods, Primal-Dual Solutions and Central Path, Primal Affine-
Scaling Method, Primal Newton Barrier Method, Primal-Dual Interior-Point Methods. Nonlinear
Constrained Optimization: Constrained Optimization, Constraints, Classification of Constrained
Optimization Problems, Simple Transformation Methods ,Lagrange Multipliers , First-Order Necessary
Conditions, Second-Order Conditions, Convexity , Duality Quadratic And Convex Programming: Convex
QP Problems with Equality Constraints, Active-Set Methods for Strictly Convex QP Problems , Interior-
Point Methods for Convex QP Problems, Cutting-Plane Methods for CP Problems, Ellipsoid Methods.
Minimax Methods: Minimax Algorithms, Improved Minimax Algorithms,
References
     1.Practical Optimization Algorithms And Engineering Applications,                  Andreas Antoniou
     2.An Introduction To Optimization                       Edwin K., P. Chong & Stanislaw h. Zak
CSE453 CYBER CRIME AND INFORMATION WARFARE
Introduction of cyber crime, challenges of cyber crime, categorizing cyber crime, cyber terrorism, virtual
crimes, perception of cyber criminals: hackers, insurgents and extremist group, interception of data,
surveillance and protection, criminal copy right infringement, cyber stalking, hiding crimes in cyber space
and methods of concealment. Anonymity and markets, privacy and security at risk in the global
information society, privacy in cyber space, war fare concept, information as an intelligence weapon,
attack and retaliation attack and defense. An I-WAR risk analysis model, implication of I WAR for
information managers, perceptual intelligence and I-WAR, handling cyber terrorism and information
warfare, Jurisdiction.
References
     1. Principle of cyber crime                             Jonathan Clough
     2. Information warfare: Corporate attack and defense in digital world
                                                                William Hutchinson, Mathew Warren
CSE454 WIRELESS NETWORKS
Introduction to wireless communication, and future trends, Wireless Generations and Standards, Wireless
Physical Layer Concepts,fundamentals of antennas, Cellular Concept and Cellular System
Fundamentals.Spread Spectrum Modulation Techniques, Coding and Error Control, Multiple Access
Technique for Wireless Communications, OFDM. Wireless LAN Technologies, Wireless IEEE
Standards, Mobile Network Layer (Mobile IP). Mobile Transport Layer (Mobile TCP), Mobile Data
network (GPRS), WAP Model and architecture, Introduction to Ad hoc networks, Sensor networks,
Bluetooth networks and Wireless Mesh networks.

                                                                                                       206
References
     1.Wireless communication Principles and Practice,                         T. S. Rappaport
     2.Mobile Communications                                                  Schiller
     3.Principles of Wireless Networks: A Unified Approach             Pahalvan, K. and Krishnamurthy,
     4.Wireless Communications and Networking                                 William Stallings
CSE455 INTERNET TECHNOLOGY
Inter networking:- Concept architecture, protocols and devices like bridge(spanning tree concept),
switch(switching technique) and hub. IP(v4), IP Addressing scheme ARP, RARP, IP routing , IP
datagram and datagram forwarding, IP encapsulation. ICMP error message and ICMP query message,
TCP, UDP, three way handshaking, segment format, fragmentation and reassembly, timer and
retransmission, concept of       MTU(maximum transmission unit), MSS(maximum segment size),
RTT(round trip time), ISN (initial sequence number), the transport layer congestion management
(congestion window & threshold value). Application layer protocols firewalls, digital signature, http,
DNS, SMTP, POP, FTP command, file translation, TFTP, NFS, concept of virtual terminals, browser
architecture, HTML, XML, basic concepts of client-server computing,CGI techniques for Dynamic Web
documents, network Management:-SNMP, NMS. Network security, protocol startup procedure, BOOTP,
DHCP, Intranet contents, security aspects, Internet site and troubleshooting, world wide web.
References
     1. TCP/IP vol 1                                           Richard Stevens
     2. Computer Network and Internet                          D.E. Comer
     3. Internet                                               Coleman& Dyson
CSE 456 EHTICAL HACKING
Ethical hacking Overview, TCP/IP Concepts Review, network and computer Attacks,Foot printing and
social engineering, port scanning enumeration,Programming for security professionalsPassword hacking,
windows hacking, network hacking, anonymity and email hacking. web Servers hacking, session
hijacking,Surveillance, desktop and server OS Vulnerabilities,Database attack, hacking wireless
networks, cryptography, network protection systems,Trojan and backdoor applications, legal resources,
virtualization and Ethical Hacking
References
    1.Ethical Hacking and Network Defense.          Michael T. Simpson, Kent Backman, James Corley
    2.Hacking Exposed Network Security Secrets & Solutions,
                                                         Stuart McClure Joel Scambray, George Kurtz
    3.Network Security, A Hacker Perspective          AnkitFadia


35 DEPARTMENT OF PLANNING (B.Plan)
PLA 111 INTRODUCTIONS TO PHYSICAL PLANNING
Planning as a discipline, multidisciplinary nature, role of a planner, fields of planning- Urban, regional,
environmental, transport and infrastructure.
Various definitions of town and country planning; Goals and objectives of planning; Components of
planning; Benefits of planning; Arguments for and against planning
Economics and social planning as bases of physical planning, Types of plans: Definition of development
plan; Types of development plans: master plan, city development plan, structure plan, district plan, action
area plan, subject plan. Hierarchy of plans: regional plan, sub-regional plan; Sector plans and spatial
plans; Town planning schemes.

                                                                                                       207
